There was no Open Championship in 1871, because of the death of one of its biggest supporters and lack of an organiser, and when it was staged again in 1872 Tommy won it for a fourth successive time, a feat never since matched. His was the first name engraved on the new prize, the Claret Jug, commissioned at a cost of £30 and still awarded to the winner today. Some say that Tommy never achieved the heights of his Championship years again – but soon after his fourth victory he had other things on his mind. He was courting his future wife, Margaret Drinnen, the daughter of a Lanarkshire miner who was 10 years older than Tommy. She was apprenticed in the lace industry at the age of nine, was one of 10 children and, like two of her sisters, she gave birth to an illegitimate child. To the pious, church-going Morris household, this, if they had known, might well have been a significant obstacle to their approval of her. The infant, born when Margaret was 25, died after eight weeks. Tommy's parents, Tom and Nancy, did not make the journey to the wedding in Whitburn. Did they disapprove of Margaret? They would have known her well enough, for she arrived in St Andrews in 1871 to work as a housemaid. There were no wedding photographs, nor indeed any other pictures of Margaret, which is curious given that St Andrews was well furnished with photographers and Tommy was photographed several times alone and with his father and sister. This, and the fact that neither of his parents attended the wedding, remains a mystery. The fine house that Tommy acquired for his bride in Playfair Place attests to the financial wellbeing of Tommy and his independent attitude. He clearly did not subscribe to the Scots Presbyterian ethos that someone from the working classes simply did not flaunt new-found prosperity. On Saturday, 4 September 1875, Tommy and his father played against Musselburgh's Park brothers, Willie and Mungo (not the explorer of the same name) at North Berwick in a match that had been talked about for months. They began play at 11am: in St Andrews that afternoon, Margaret died while giving birth to a stillborn child. Drama has been added to the tragedy by a multitude of scribes since, but the most accurate report is probably that in The Scotsman two days later. According to this report, when the match was over and the Morrises declared the winners, a telegram was handed to Tommy "announcing that his wife was seriously ill and requesting that he should get back to St Andrews with all possible haste". A summer resident in the town offered to sail them across the Firth of Forth in his yacht moored in the harbour. The yacht had just left when a messenger reached the pier with a second telegram stating that both mother and child were dead. Tommy's friends agreed to allow the yacht, within easy hailing distance, to sail "without acquainting those on board with the distressing news, fearing that the shock to the unhappy husband would be too great". Tom Morris added this Scotsman report to his scrapbook of cuttings, and although he lived another 32 years, it was the last entry he would ever make. The absence of any notice of Margaret's death in the St Andrews news columns is hard to understand. After her death there would appear to have been no further contact with the Drinnens of Whitburn, and Margaret's family descendants today knew nothing of their connections with the famous Morris family of St Andrews. There is no evidence whatsoever that anyone in the town had any knowledge of her background or that she had given birth to a child out of wedlock. Was Margaret not altogether accepted by the Morrises, or was the tragedy of her short marriage too painful a subject to be dwelt upon? We may never know. Tommy was devoted to Margaret and was distraught. It was said that he had to be persuaded to play golf again: when he did, his sparkling form deserted him. Talk in St Andrews is that he never recovered from a brutal challenge match, against Arthur Molesworth, played in November over six days of bitter cold, with high winds and snowfall. Men armed with brooms and shovels had to clear the St Andrews greens of snow on the Saturday, and on the Monday and Tuesday morning there was three inches of snow on the links, with some drifts of up to two feet. Tommy won, and for his efforts he made at least £100 for his friends and backers. Through a combination of ill health and unhappiness, he began drinking heavily. Extravagant statements since claim that he drank himself into an early grave, but there is no evidence that drink played any part in what was to follow. Tommy was reported to have become "seriously unwell" in October, though the nature of his illness is unknown. He died on Christmas Day, 1875. The available evidence suggests that he died from some cardiovascular disaster, probably a ruptured aneurysm of one of the main arteries at the back of his chest. He was 24 years old.