The Queen's speech is almost a side show. The story of this government will be cuts, cuts, cuts. As Her Majesty said, deficit reduction is their first purpose, so in the darkening context of all the pain to come, these offerings may come to seem insignificant. The referendum on an alternative vote and House of Lords reform are the strongest sign of Liberal influence: these certainly would not have been there otherwise. Expect fireworks, though, when Alan Johnson adds in an amendment for real proportional representation, which the Liberal Democrats will have to back and the Tories will fight with every weapon they can muster. Like other items here, the big question is why, in 13 years, did Labour never do it? The same goes for reconnecting pensions with earnings, after Margaret Thatcher linked them only to prices: as with the above, Labour said it would, but not until a date after it had left office. Too many regrets leave them tongue-tied on too much of this. Most contentious, however Michael Gove now advances, will be the Tories' free schools, many of which will be run by private companies. The spectacle of profits being made from state education at a time when schools and all the surrounding services for children are cut to the bone will not be popular – a policy devised in the days of plenty, toxic in the days of penury. Power is to be devolved to local councils – but even the Tory councils are not hurling their hats in the air. Why? As one Tory put it with glee at their last conference: "We will devolve the axe!" The gold carriage, the crown carried upon a velvet cushion – oh, and the peace protestor arrested outside. Only Dennis Skinner spoke up against the pomp, responding to black rod's summons by muttering "no more royal commissions" – although Nick Clegg, who so admires the more business-like governance found on the continent, might well feel the same way. Britain's old politics reasserted its faux medieval form in the novel setting of coalition. The substance of the gracious speech, however, mixed something old with something new. A programme so steeped in political liberalism is something not seen for many long years. We wait to see exactly what Nick Clegg will put into his great repeal bill, which will supposedly restore the freedoms that a snooping state has taken away, but its pride of place within the programme is itself an important moment for liberals. All the more so since it comes accompanied by plans for a measure of voting reform and the democratisation of the Lords; and all the more so since it was not coupled to the draconian law-and-order measures of the type that were obligatory during the Blair years. But if the political liberalism here was new, the economic liberalism on offer was wearyingly familiar. Free schools, parent power, the privatisation of Royal Mail – one of the last of our publicly owned services – is in keeping with the consumerist drift of policy seen ever since 1979. The vague commitment to do something about bank regulation fell short of the tough talk Vince Cable was using prior to polling day. In the realm of the new politics, the market remains sovereign. How easily the unimaginable becomes routine. After two election manifestos, a pair of coalition agreements – short and long – and a bad leak to the Sunday newspapers, there wasn't much shock in the Queen's speech: we knew what was coming. But pause for a moment to remember that this was an extraordinary day, the scale of change caught in the surprised faces of Liberal Democrat ministers, no longer afterthoughts at this event. Compare this year's speech to Labour's, last autumn. The old speech set the state as the protector of the individual. There were promises to stimulate growth, extend training and strengthen services. The message was that government existed to do good. Today's speech was the philosophical opposite: the emphasis was on individual rights and duties, paring back regulation and laws. This was a speech written by a government that does not trust its own strength and, as such, it did justice to the promises set out by the coalition. What stands out most of all is the size of the ambition: 22 bills, most of them big, most of them potential flashpoints – with public service workers, or unions, or inside the coalition. Parliament will have to sweat this summer to pass them, even with a House of Lords that is well-disposed to much of this agenda. And this, too, is what the coalition promised. There was a point, long ago it seems now, when it was hard to take seriously David Cameron's claim to be a liberal progressive. There was a point, just a fortnight ago, when a Tory deal with the Lib Dems was implausible. But this speech is the synthesis of those two things. It will bring a liberal revolution.